   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Opinion Supported by Op-Ed Contributor The Left Shouldn’t Be Too Proud to Meme Image Credit Illustration by Sally Thurer; Photograph by Sean Gladwell/Getty Images By  Jennifer Grygiel March 5, 2018 Say the word “meme” and most people think of funny videos that go viral or assaults by internet trolls on platforms like 4chan, a website frequented by alt-right groups. President Trump, who regularly retweets memes, many of them directed at Democrats, is perhaps the most famous devotee of the form. Memes are powerful tools for communicating ideas, a fact Mr. Trump seems to understand better than many of his critics. One needs only to look at the reach of the Russian government ’s memes to understand why it exploited the form in trying to influence the 2016 election. The term “meme” was first coined by the evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins in his book “The Selfish Gene.” Successful memes, he believed, had common elements: They were long-lived and could be copied easily and disseminated widely. The rate at which memes were created increased exponentially with the advent of the internet and social media. Internet memes typically combine text with images or video, often humorous in nature. And because video is rich in information , it makes memes particularly effective in conveying snappy ideas, such as political expressions like “ fake news ” or mocking nicknames like “ Crooked Hillary ” or “ the Amazon Washington Post ” favored by the president. Mr. Trump’s affinity for memes is not surprising: He is a branding and marketing expert who has specialized in creating trademark phrases like “You’re fired.” Even the name “Trump” is a meme. Patrons who stay at Trump-branded resorts and hotels enjoy the aura of wealth and power that he has constructed. The president’s supporters have also become skilled at creating memes. The content of these memes is not always civil, but they are often effective in getting shared across the internet. For example, a meme that portrayed Mr. Trump hitting Hillary Clinton with a golf ball was retweeted by the president and went viral, inspiring 41,000 more retweets. Some might find Mr. Trump’s tweets and verbal attacks to be childish, bullying, unprofessional or simplistic. But another way to think about them is that he’s speaking in the cultural language of memes; he is using memes to build support for his ideas. So when the president retweets the infamous video of him wrestling CNN to the ground, he is promoting the idea that the media is out to get him. Democrats, however, have been slow to see the potential of memes as a political weapon. Many seem to regard the form as amateurish, vulgar or low-brow. Mrs. Clinton made a few attempts at using memes but struggled with the execution. In one notable attempt, she used a “ Texts from Hillary ” meme for her Twitter profile photo starting in 2013, perhaps hoping it would make her appear hip and internet-savvy. But the meme met with some ridicule and probably did not reach the swing voters she badly needed . Mrs. Clinton also attempted to use a meme on Election Day, generating a video that showed her participating in the “ mannequin challenge ,” a meme that had recently gone viral. But she did this after that meme had already started to fade. During the 2016 Democratic primaries, supporters of Senator Bernie Sanders generated many memes promoting their man, often focusing on his untamed hair and his socialism , or unscripted moments that seemed funny or charming, such as when a bird landed on his lectern during a rally. But Mr. Sanders himself did not engage with memes as much as Mr. Trump, who shared them regularly during the campaign. At the same time, pro-Trump activists on the right like Mike Cernovich aggressively used memes to attack Mrs. Clinton and spread wild conspiracy theories about her, including the idea that she led a child-abuse ring out of a Washington pizzeria, a concocted scheme that came to be known as “ Pizzagate .” If Democrats and other critics of the president want to fight back effectively on the internet, they need to figure out how to harness the meme to communicate ideas and build community. This approach does not come without risk . People often create sarcastic or ironic memes that could be misinterpreted. Increased meme use could also add to polarization between the two parties. Research has shown that there are a few characteristics that make a meme successful. Short, template-based memes that avoid profanities and use clear, simple words do well. This could help to explain why Mr. Trump’s pledge to “build that wall” was such a successful meme and campaign platform. Voters understood what Mr. Trump stood for, while Mrs. Clinton’s platform was more complex and abstract. Both candidates supported fighting terrorism, but the idea of a “Muslim ban” was more concrete and could be easily understood, talked about and translated into internet memes. In this way, memes can provide vital feedback to candidates, signaling that voters understand a campaign message. If voters are not creating memes or retweeting the ones you create, it probably means they do not get what you stand for. I have heard many Democrats comment that they will not stoop to Mr. Trump’s level by trying to use memes for political gain. But democracy is increasingly dependent on engaging voters on social media. If the goal is to build a movement that is effective in opposing attacks on democratic ideals and a free press, the left can’t be too proud to meme. Jennifer Grygiel ( @jmgrygiel ) is an assistant professor of communications at the S. I. Newhouse School of Public Communications at Syracuse University.  Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion) , and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 27 of the New York edition with the headline: The Left Should Embrace Memes . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              