   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Europe Supported by Italy Braces for Fake News as Election Approaches Image Matteo Renzi, the leader of Italy’s governing Democratic Party, has called on social media companies to police their platforms to avoid the spread of false information before the election on Sunday. Credit Fabio Frustaci/European Pressphoto Agency By  Iliana Magra March 1, 2018 With Europe’s next major election set to take place in Italy on Sunday, fears that false information could mislead voters have again surfaced. Misinformation has thrived on social media, where it can be difficult to tell the difference between real and false quotes, images and articles. And with internet companies and governments struggling to keep up with the waves of false reports, politicians have expressed concern about how the misinformation might skew the voting process and stoke tensions. Here are examples of how false information has spread in Europe recently, polarizing opinions about contentious topics like Muslim immigration. A Czech Smear Campaign Jiri Drahos was the main opponent of President Milos Zeman in the Czech presidential election in January. Image Jiri Drahos, left on the screen, and President Milos Zeman of the Czech Republic during a televised debate in January. Mr. Drahos was accused of collaborating with the secret police in the 1980s. He denied it. Credit David W Cerny/Reuters In the summer of 2017, Aeronet News, a Czech news website that has been linked to fake news in the past and that has a distinctly pro-Russia bent, published an article insinuating that Mr. Drahos had committed acts of pedophilia and that he had collaborated with the secret police in the 1980s. After the article received lots of attention, Mr. Drahos released a statement on his website in which he denied the allegations, but the damage, it seems, had already been done . False Maps in France Two months before the French presidential election of 2017, Bernard Barrier, who claimed to be a former employee of the French Ministry of Defense, posted a map that he said showed the locations of clashes between immigrants and the police. The map was shared more than 15,600 times on Facebook. But it was later proved that the image had been taken from an article in the British newspaper The Daily Telegraph article, published in 2005 , about riots mainly by mobs of young people from poor neighborhoods. Immigration played a crucial role in the campaigning, and Marine Le Pen, of the far-right National Front, made the final round of voting . But she was beaten by the center-right politician Emmanuel Macron. A Selfie Is Skewed in Germany Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany visited refugees in Berlin in 2015. While there, Anas Modamani, a Syrian refugee, took a selfie with her , which he then posted to his Facebook account. Then came the Brussels attacks in March 2016. When a photograph of the prime suspect was publicized, the selfie with Ms. Merkel, who had been under pressure for her open-door policy toward refugees, started circulating on social media — but with Mr. Modamani falsely identified as one of the  bombers . Image Anas Modamani, a Syrian refugee, took a selfie with Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany in 2015 in Berlin that was later used to spread fake news. Credit Fabrizio Bensch/Reuters Mr. Modamani sued Facebook in an attempt to prevent its users from further reposting the picture, but he lost the case. Police Violence in Spain On the day in October that Catalan secessionists voted for independence from Spain, a Twitter account with the name Persian Rose shared a video that claimed to show violence by the Spanish police against voters in Catalonia. The post received more than 3,900 retweets. Even though the video featured the unsavory actions of Spanish police officers , the footage had nothing to do with the vote in Catalonia. It was about a general strike and was first posted to YouTube in 2012. Photo Is Not All It Seems in Britain A few hours after a deadly terrorist attack on Westminster Bridge in London in March 2017, a post on Twitter accused a woman wearing a hijab of paying “no mind to the terror attack” and of “casually” walking by a dying man. It was quickly shared widely on social media. But the moment described in the photograph was misrepresented and out of context. Twitter later identified the account , which at the time went by the description “proud Texan and American patriot,” as Russia-based. Fears also persist that Russian interference played a role in Britain’s vote in 2016 to leave the European Union . Justin Bank and Hana de Goeij contributed reporting.  A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 8 of the New York edition with the headline: Fake News That Rattled Other Spots In Europe . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage The Mystery Man Who Runs Italy’s ‘Five Star’ From the Shadows Feb. 28, 2018 Image Italy Is Having an Election. Most Italians Are Too Depressed to Care. Feb. 27, 2018 Image She Won Italians’ Hearts. But Can She Win Their Votes? Feb. 9, 2018 Image Anti-Fascist Protesters Rally in Italy as Mussolini’s Heirs Gain Ground Feb. 24, 2018 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              