   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Opinion Supported by Letters The E.P.A.’s Snub of Scientific Research Image Scott Pruitt, the Environmental Protection Agency administrator, wants to block the use of studies that do not make public the raw data behind research. Credit Aaron P. Bernstein/Getty Images March 30, 2018 To the Editor: Re “ Narrower Scope for E.P.A. Rules ” (front page, March 27): The discrediting of science is a shocking new piece of American life. The decision by the Environmental Protection Agency administrator, Scott Pruitt, to limit use of scientific research when determining agency regulations, unless the raw data can be made public, is simply wrong. America has led the way in scientific research, and we have depended on that information for everything from medical breakthroughs to space travel. To put a lid on use of important research and to question its validity is dangerous. Proper scientific research as carried out by well-trained scientists is steeped in validity. While warnings about our changing climate abound and threats to our food safety surface, nonscientists are leading a charge to undermine research, and, in turn, much-needed regulation. The E.P.A. is setting the table for a dangerous new world. We need to say “no”! SALLY COURTRIGHT, ALBANY To the Editor: The rhetoric that Scott Pruitt uses makes it seem as though he is doing the American people a favor by providing them the “transparency” they deserve. But Mr. Pruitt is the one not providing the American people transparency. E.P.A. employees are required to have an escort to Mr. Pruitt’s office, where he sometimes doesn’t even allow them to take notes during meetings. He spent $3,000 for his office to be swept of hidden devices and installed a soundproof booth for another $25,000. Mr. Pruitt should be held accountable when asking scientific agencies to spend copious amounts of money so they can share raw data when he is clearly living in a constant state of secrecy. If he is demanding scientists to be transparent for the American people’s sake, shouldn’t he be following his own advice? OLIVIA MACIEIK, WASHINGTON To the Editor: While Washington’s attention is aimed at Russian collusion and Stormy Daniels distractions, “ New Litmus Test for Trump’s Court Picks: Taming the Bureaucracy ” (front page, March 28) shines a light on the real news. As an environmental attorney, when I hear shrinking “the administrative state,” it means turning our back on nearly 50 years of human health protections. For a year, the Trump administration has been laser-focused on repealing, retracting and rolling back science-based safeguards. Yet, as your article reveals, the pledged “deconstruction of the administrative state” under Mr. Trump is more than just a four-year pausing of Obama-era regulations. The plan is long term — nominating young and extreme judges to lifetime appointments, nominees who hold a myopic goal of stopping the executive agencies charged with protecting us. Fair judges are important to the sustainability of our democracy, but with more than 170 vacancies, sustainability is in question. It is a critical time for the environment, agency experts who protect it and our federal courts. Each must be protected and not sacrificed for pure politics. TRENT A. DOUGHERTY COLUMBUS, OHIO Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              